This, and the next videos are a follow up to the Indirect Object Identification task and video from
the previous section on editing Hidden States.
In this video, I will give a brief reminder of activation patching and then explain what we need to
do to patch one specific attention head instead of patching the entire transformer output.
And you'll also get a reminder about creating, implanting, and removing hook functions on the fly
as they are needed in the experiment instead of what I more frequently do, which is to implant all
of the hooks as soon as I import the model, and then have a toggle so that the hooks are active only
when needed.
Let me begin by just reminding you of activation patching.
This is a screenshot of a slide from the previous section where I introduced patching and the I o task.
If you have not watched that video, then I strongly recommend going through that video and the code
demo before continuing this video and also the code challenge in the next video, I'm going to be using
code and terms and concepts that I introduced in this patching and IO video.
So the idea was that we have two versions of the model that process two text sequences that are nearly
identical but differ on one key token.
And then during the forward pass, we take the activation from somewhere in the model when it processes
sequence A and transplant that activation into the model when it's processing token sequence B, and
the main goal is to see if we can corrupt model B so that it actually gets grammatical context information
from A, and therefore makes the wrong prediction about the indirect object token.
This was the key result from that lecture that when we took the hidden states embeddings vector from
the model, processing the subject from the model to the MC model.
Then somewhere around halfway through the transformer block sequence, we confuse the model so that
it actually thought that the correct indirect object was Emma.
And you'll remember that in the context of this sentence, that would mean that the model thought that
the correct text is.
Emma gives the coffee to Emma.
Okay.
So this is just a quick reminder to, like, reactivate those happy memories.
What we are going to do in this video is the same concept, but at a finer level of granularity in particular.
Instead of patching the hidden states, we will patch individual heads within a transformer block.
So here you see 12 little squircles.
By the way, a squircle is a square with rounded edges.
Good word to know.
So imagine each of these squircles represents one head from one transformer block in GPT two small.
So then the idea is that we take the activation from one head from the donor sequence in green, and
patch that onto exactly the same head.
But while the model is processing sequence B now in a coding mechanistic sense, this is only very,
very slightly different from transplanting an entire embeddings vector.
It's still the same mechanism.
It's just copying a different vector from somewhere else in the model.
But in a conceptual sense, it is actually extremely different in terms of the information carried by
the entire embeddings vector at the output of the transformer block, like what we did in the previous
section, versus a specific head inside of a transformer block.
The hidden states that the transformer block outputs are the actual embeddings vectors of each token
that directly leads to the token that is selected during training and during text generation.
On the other hand, the attention heads do not actually work with or output the embeddings vectors themselves.
Instead, they calculate small adjustments to those vectors based on the surrounding context from previous
tokens.
So that's just something to keep in mind when considering the results we will get here, and I'll have
more to say about that distinction in the code challenge in the next video.
Anyway, now I will give you an overview of what I'll show you in the code demo in this video.
Before doing any patching, we actually need to get all of the clean attention head activations in the
previous section.
We did this by exporting the hidden states, but to get access to the activation of the attention heads
before they get mixed together and before they get mixed in with the MLP adjustments, we need to hook
those activations.
And that's what you see here.
So I will start the code just by implanting this hook.
Exactly like what you've seen earlier in the course on observational interpretability.
So there's no manipulations here.
There's no patching, there's no zeroing out.
All I'm doing here is hooking into the activations and storing them in a dictionary so I can access
them later.
You can also see that this hook function has no output.
There's no return statement here.
Of course there is this return statement here, but this corresponds to the outer function that incorporates
the layer number.
So after running through the models to get the attention activations, we are then ready for the experiment.
And you can see that code here.
This is pretty similar to the code from the previous section, where I looped over all of the layers
and then created, implanted and destroyed the hooks inside the layer loop.
But here's a question.
Don't we also need a for loop over all the different heads within a layer?
Actually, the answer is yes.
Technically, we should have an embedded for loop in here over all of the heads within each layer.
I am not doing that here.
In fact, what I am doing in this video, in this code demo, is replacing all of the activations from
all of the heads and also from all of the tokens.
So that is not very selective.
If you think that what I should be doing here is patching one head at a time, then that is great.
I agree with you.
And now you have something to look forward to for the code challenge in the next video.
But to keep things simple for this video, I decided to replace all of the tension heads and all of
the tokens with the corresponding heads and tokens from the version A of the model activations, and
that's what's happening inside this hook function.
So I get the input into the C proj layer, reshape it so that we can easily access all of the individual
heads, or index each of the individual heads, and then replace those activations with the ones that
I got from the clean version of model A, and then I'm also storing the activations here for model B,
so that we can compare them to make sure that this code really works the way we expect, and then reshaping
back to the embeddings dimensionality, and then returning that as the input so that it can be processed
by the rest of the model.
Then I do a forward pass over here and calculate the IOI measure, just like in the previous section
where I first introduced this experiment.
By the way, given that I'm changing all of the heads and not just one of them, you might think that
it's really unnecessary to deal with all of this reshaping business.
Again, I agree with you 100% in this video.
It's a little bit unnecessary to reshape the vectors here.
This tensor here from embeddings to heads by head dimension, only to reshape it back.
But I am including this reshaping code here, because I want you to be able to use this code for the
exercises in the next video.
Anyway, once we are done this experiment, we can make a visualization just like in the previous section,
which I also showed in the previous slide.
So here that result looks like this.
Quite a bit different from how remarkably well this worked out when we patched the entire hidden state.
In fact, even when manipulating all of the attention heads over all of the tokens, the effect is quite
subtle and the model never even has a numerical preference for the indirect object.
Now, that has nothing to do with using the small version of the model here, compared to the Excel
version that I used in the previous section.
So this is a thought provoking discrepancy, and I'm going to leave it as an open question for now.
But the final exercise in the next video is actually a mathematical description of why we get this discrepancy
between the very subtle effects here and the very overwhelmingly convincing effects from the previous
section.
Anyway, let's now switch to code and have a closer look.
Importing some libraries.
Let's see here I'm importing GPT two and that will take a second to load in.
And I also change the sentences slightly from the previous section.
So here the text we will be working with are.
When Sam and Sally went to the park, Sam gave a gift to.
Of course, you know the next word should be Sally, or her could be either one of those.
I am going to use Sam and Sally here.
I'm finding the token indices for the target words Sam and Sally.
And what does this mean here?
Eh, so when, uh.
So we expect the correct result here to be Sally.
So that means that text A should have target B and text B should have target A.
Maybe that's a little confusing, but somehow when I was coding this I thought that was a good idea.
Okay.
And then uh, yeah.
Getting the tokens and pushing them to the GPU.
Okay.
So now we want the clean activation vectors from A so that we have them available to patch onto the
model when it's processing sequence B.
So a couple of convenience variables here.
And uh, here is the uh hook which does not do any manipulations.
So there's no output of this hook function here.
All I'm doing is getting these tensors, reshaping them.
Remember that these come in naturally.
Uh, as, uh, embeddings dimension at the end.
So 768.
But that 768 is not the embeddings dimensionality.
It is actually the number of heads times the head dimensionality.
So that's why I'm reshaping them over here and then just storing them in this dictionary so I can access
the entire head for all the sequences, although it's just one per run, all the tokens, all the heads
and the head dimensionality and then yeah, access that later.
I'm implanting this into C proj.
This is the A forward Pre-hook.
Remember this discussion from previous videos in this section?
The reason why we want the pre-hook is for this, uh, layer over here C proj.
Let me go back to this model description here.
So what C proj does the purpose of this layer is to take the concatenated attention heads and multiply
them by the w0 mixing matrix, so all the heads get mixed together.
That's a fantastic thing to do for the operations of the model, but it's completely wrong for what
we want here, because when we get the output of C proj, you can no longer access individual heads.
The data have gone back into the embeddings dimensionality space.
Okay.
So we want the input into C proj.
And yeah that you see here.
So here's the input.
And this is what we reshape and store.
Okay.
So let me run that code here.
And now here's a question for you.
Why do I do all of this.
Wouldn't it take up less code if I would just do something like this?
If you would like to pause the video and think about why this code is problematic, then feel free to.
Okay, so the answer is that if I run these two models and then remove the hook, that would mean that
all of the head information that we store in the hook gets overridden by tokens be, which is not what
we want.
That's what we actually want to replace.
So what we need to do is run through tokens A and then remove the hook.
And then we can process tokens B.
And now that I see that I have the answer exactly in here.
Uh, okay.
So uh, anyway, uh, that is the reason.
All right.
Very good.
Let me run through this.
That is very fast to run.
And here I'm calculating the score.
If you are confused as to what this means, then, uh, yeah.
You should go back and rewatch the video in the previous section.
But basically when we run this.
So sequence a out a what we expect is that the correct output is B that corresponds to the token for
Sally.
So Sam gave the gift to Sally.
So therefore uh this value should be negative and this value should be positive okay.
And then we see that indeed they are.
So these are the baseline values.
We can use that as reference points to see how much we are really manipulating the model by doing the
patching.
Okay.
This is just uh yeah checking the size of this matrix.
So one sequence in the batch, 14 tokens, 12 heads and 64 dimensions per head.
And of course 12 times six is 768.
I know that not because I'm like a math genius and I can do that in my head, but we know that there
is a very strict relationship between the number of heads, the head dimensionality and the embeddings.
Dimensionality and the product of these two must equal the embeddings dimensionality.
So therefore yeah that's going to be 768.
Okay.
Very good.
So now we are ready for the main experiment.
Here is the loop over all of the layers in the model.
Here I define the hook function.
I'll go through each of these lines in a moment.
Here I am implanting the hook again into C proj and it's a pre hook.
So we're going to access and now also manipulate the inputs into C proj layer.
And then I run the forward pass remove the hook so that it's cleared out for the next iteration of this
for loop.
And then calculate the IOI metric as before.
Okay.
So that's the big picture overview.
What are we doing inside this hook function.
So I'm getting the head and reshaping it from embeddings into heads by dimensions.
Here I'm making a clone.
This is not strictly necessary here because I'm replacing the full thing, but not a bad practice to
do anyway.
Just so you basically decouple this thing from the computational graph.
Okay.
And then I'm replacing this head by the corresponding head from the same layer from the activations
for token sequence A, remember that we are pushing sequence B through this model, but we are replacing
with A.
And then what I'm doing is storing those activations in this dictionary here so we can check them later.
Again, this is just for methodological confirmation.
It's really just to make sure that the code works.
We should certainly expect that after I run all of this code that head x b equals head x a.
If they are not equal, then there's some mistake somewhere easy to make, you know, like indexing
errors if you're thinking about.
Uh, the, uh, hidden states, you might accidentally put a plus one in here.
Anyway, good to incorporate these kinds of code sanity checks, especially when you are developing
your code in the beginning.
Okay, so, uh, then I reshape back to, uh, embeddings dimensions and then put that back into the
input.
So it replaces the initial input and gets mixed together, uh, according to the W0 matrix.
And again, as I mentioned in the uh, slides, it is really not necessary in this code file to, uh,
reshape here only to undo the reshaping over here.
But this code is in here because I.
I hope that this will help you solve the code challenge in the next video, where you will be replacing
one head at a time instead of all of the heads within each layer.
Okay.
Very good.
So I hope all of this code makes sense.
Also super fast to run through on the GPU with GPT two.
And here is just some confirmation.
This is yeah, what we've seen before.
And here what I am plotting is the activations from layer seven.
So transformer block seven, the 10th token, the 11th or the 12th head and all of the head dimensions.
And why am I doing this?
I don't know, these are just kind of arbitrarily chosen numbers.
It doesn't matter what layer you pick, what token and what head you pick.
As long as these are the same from A and B, what you expect is that these are the same here.
They overlap perfectly here.
Again, this is not surprising.
This is trivial.
But if this were different, if these did not overlap, then there would be something wrong with your
code.
And then yeah, you would know to look into the code a little bit.
Okay.
So now we can visualize the results.
And this code is the same code that I used in that previous video, uh, in the previous section.
And what do we see here.
So remember in the previous video this really somewhere around halfway through the transformer sequence,
it plummeted all the way down to the blue line over here.
And what we see here, with the exception of something weird happening at the final transformer block,
uh, we see it did have an impact.
So patching over the attention heads did push the model a little bit in the direction of preferring,
uh, a over B, so in the direction of the wrong answer, which was the correct answer for sequence
A, but it's not a really huge effect.
So something that we can see visually, but it's not like it even crossed zero.
The last thing I want to do in this demo is just rerun all of this code for GPT two medium.
And basically it's just to show you that this pattern is not unique to the small version of the model.
Uh, let's see.
Yeah, we see a similar pattern here when we use the medium version of the model, if you like, you
can also test the large and the xlarge versions of the model.
Totally fine.
But you will see basically a similar kind of pattern.
I'd like to reiterate a running theme in this part of the course about mechanistic interpretability.
Writing code to read and write from the model internals during a forward pass is not that hard to do
can be tricky.
It can be confusing and complicated.
But after having gone through this course and keeping enough sanity checks in your code to make sure
that it works correctly, I don't think you're ever going to have real problems with coding up experiments.
The much more difficult part is having a good conceptual understanding of what you are manipulating
and why.
So in this case, we found a really striking difference between the impact of manipulating an entire
transformer block versus just the entire attention adjustment.
Subblock.
Again, I will have a longer and deeper discussion about why that might be the case in the next video,
but the short version is that the attention Subblock is not calculating the embeddings vectors, but
just these minor tweaks like little adjustments to those embeddings vectors.
And what we have done here in this video is modify the tweaks.
We haven't modified the full embeddings vectors.
Anyway, I am looking forward to guiding you through the code challenge in the next video.
I will see you then.